University of Illinois

School of Information Sciences

IS 501\
Fall 2018\
Lecture: Tuesday 1:00-2:20 PM 217 Noyes Laboratory\
Lab 501A: Thursday 10:00-11:50 AM Room 46

Lab 501B: Thursday 1:00-2:50 PM Room 12A

Lab 501C: Wednesday 5:00-6:50 PM Room 109

4 credit hours

**Instructor**: Rhiannon Bettivia

Email: <rbettivi@illinois.edu>

Office: LIS 329

Office Hours: Wednesday 3:00-4:45 PM

**Instructor**: Emily Knox

Email: <knox@illinois.edu> (Best way to contact me -- I generally
respond within 24 hours)

Office: LIS 332

Office Hour: Thursdays, 12:00-1:00 PM and by appointment

Phone: (217) 300-0212

**Instructor**: Jodi Schneider\
Email: <jodi@illinois.edu> (Best way to contact me -- I generally
respond within 24 hours)\
Office: LIS 334\
Office Hour: After class and by appointment

Phone: (217) 300-4328

**TA**: Jamillah Gabriel

Email: <jrg3@illinois.edu>

Course Description {#course-description-1}
------------------

This course provides an intensive and thorough introduction to
fundamentals of information organization and access from the point of
view of the field of library and information science. The course is not
an introduction to LIS as a whole or to the profession of
librarianship---the focus is squarely on information organization and
access. 501 aims to acquaint you with the principal problems of
information organization and access, the main streams of thought, and
the key thinkers and contributors. The material covered is broad in
scope and applicable to a wide variety of settings and systems. The
course emphasizes the central position of people, communities, and
information users in problems of information organization and access.

Course Overview {#course-overview-1}
---------------

The central themes of the course are:

Who uses information, how they use it, and what constraints shape their
use of information;

How recorded knowledge can be organized and structured;

Ways of providing access to the world\'s knowledge.

Learning Objectives
-------------------

To provide a foundation for further study in library and information
science, including an appreciation for forms of systematic research in
LIS.

To introduce central concepts, theories, principles, research issues,
and people associated with the practice and study of information
organization and access.

To advance a common set of ideas that help to define the profession\'s
orientation toward problems of information organization and access.

Course Materials
----------------

There is no required textbook for this course; required readings are
available electronically through the university library or the open Web
(as indicated).

This course will introduce you to many terms and concepts that may be
new to you.\
Remember that the Library provides access to some reference sources
online that may be helpful in providing additional background and
explanations.\
These titles are linked from:

<http://www.library.illinois.edu/infosci/research/#dictionaries> and\
<http://www.library.illinois.edu/infosci/research/#encyclopedias>

They include: *ODLIS: Online Dictionary for Library and Information
Science* and the *Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences*.

**About Rhiannon Bettivia**

Rhiannon Bettivia is a postdoctoral research associate in the School of
Information Sciences. She has a PhD in Library and Information Science
from the University of Illinois. Her research examines the politics
embedded in the technologies that support mass data aggregation, with a
focus on digital cultural heritage and the intersection of commercial
advertising entities with online identity formation. She teaches in the
areas of digital preservation and metadata. She previously worked in
moving image archiving and preservation in New York City at places
including NYU, the Federal Reserve Bank, and MoMA. She also worked on
the preservation of video games with funding from the Institute of
Museum and Library Services.

**About Emily Knox**

Emily Knox is an assistant professor at the School of Information
Sciences. She received her Ph.D. from Rutgers University's School of
Communication & Information. Her research interests include intellectual
freedom and censorship, print culture and reading practices, and
information ethics and policy. She was the associate director and
reference librarian at a theological seminary in New York City for five
years before returning to school. Emily holds a B.A. in Religion from
Smith College, an M.A. in Religion from the University of Chicago, and
an M.S. in Library and Information Science from the iSchool at Illinois.

**About Jodi Schneider****\
**Jodi Schneider is an assistant professor at the School of Information
Sciences. She studies scholarly communication and social media through
the lens of arguments, evidence, and persuasion. She is developing
Linked Data (ontologies, metadata, Semantic Web) approaches to manage
scientific evidence. Jodi holds degrees in informatics (Ph.D., National
University of Ireland, Galway), library & information science (M.S.
UIUC), mathematics (M.A. UT-Austin), and liberal arts (B.A., Great
Books, St. John\'s College). She has worked as an actuarial analyst for
a Fortune 500 insurance company, as the gift buyer for a small
independent bookstore, and in college and university libraries. She has
also held research positions across the U.S. as well as in Ireland,
England, France, and Chile.

Library Resources {#library-resources-1}
-----------------

http://www.library.illinois.edu/lis/\
lislib@library.illinois.edu\
Phone: (217) 300-8439

Writing and Bibliographic Style Resources
-----------------------------------------

The iSchool has a Writing Resources Moodle site
<https://courses.ischool.illinois.edu/course/view.php?id=3389> and
iSchool writing coaches also offer free consultations. We highly
recommend this!

The campus-wide Writers Workshop also provides free consultations. For
more information see <http://www.cws.illinois.edu/workshop/>

Academic Integrity
------------------

Please review and reflect on the academic integrity policy of the
University of Illinois,
<http://admin.illinois.edu/policy/code/article1_part4_1-401.html> to
which we subscribe. By turning in materials for review, you certify that
all work presented is your own and has been done by you independently,
or as a member of a designated group for group assignments. If, in the
course of your writing, you use the words or ideas of another writer,
proper acknowledgement must be given (using APA, Chicago, or MLA style).
Not to do so is to commit plagiarism, a form of academic dishonesty. If
you are not absolutely clear on what constitutes plagiarism and how to
cite sources appropriately, now is the time to learn. Please ask me!
Please be aware that the consequences for plagiarism or other forms of
academic dishonesty will be severe. Students who violate university
standards of academic integrity are subject to disciplinary action,
including a reduced grade, failure in the course, and suspension or
dismissal from the University.

Statement of Inclusion {#statement-of-inclusion-1}
----------------------

Inclusive Illinois Committee Diversity Statement

As the state\'s premier public university, the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign\'s core mission is to serve the interests of the
diverse people of the state of Illinois and beyond. The institution thus
values inclusion and a pluralistic learning and research environment,
one which we respect the varied perspectives and lived experiences of a
diverse community and global workforce. We support diversity of
worldviews, histories, and cultural knowledge across a range of social
groups including race, ethnicity, gender identity, sexual orientation,
abilities, economic class, religion, and their intersections.

Accessibility Statement {#accessibility-statement-1}
-----------------------

To obtain accessibility-related academic adjustments and/or auxiliary
aids, students with disabilities must contact the course instructor and
the [Disability Resources and Educational
Services](http://disability.illinois.edu/) (DRES) as soon as possible.
To contact DRES you may visit 1207 S. Oak St., Champaign, call (217)
333-4603 (V/TTY), or e-mail a message to disability@illinois.edu.

This syllabus may be obtained in alternative formats upon request.
Please contact the instructor listed above.

Assignments and Evaluation
--------------------------

Assignments are due by 11:59 PM on Thursdays meets unless otherwise
noted in the assignment description. All assignments are required for
all students. Completing all assignments is not a guarantee of a passing
grade. All work must be completed in order to pass this class. Late or
incomplete assignments will not be given full credit unless the student
has contacted the instructor prior to the due date of the assignment (or
in the case of emergencies, as soon as practicable). Late assignments
will include a penalty (half a letter grade for each day late), and no
late assignments will be accepted after 5 days from the date due. Full
assignment descriptions are available on your lab Moodle page.

### Grade Distribution

  **Assessment**           **Deadline**            **Percentage**
  ------------------------ ----------------------- ----------------
  Participation            All semester            10%
  Collections Assessment   September 6, 11:59pm    20%
  Information Needs        September 20, 11:59pm   20%
  Final Assignment         November 8, 11:59pm     50%

### Grading Scale:

94-100 = A\
90-93 = A-\
87-89 = B+\
83-86 = B\
80-82 = B-\
77-79 = C+\
73-76 = C\
70-72 = C-\
67-69 = D+\
63-66 = D\
60-62 = D-\
59 and below = F

As of Fall 2018, the minimum passing grade for required courses at the
iSchool is a "C." Please also note that students must maintain a B
average in order to remain in good standing with the Graduate College.

Reading and Assignment Schedule
===============================

Week 1, Lecture: August 28: What is Data? Information? Knowledge? 
------------------------------------------------------------------

*Required Readings*

Sweeney, M. (2014). How to read for grad school.
<http://miriamsweeney.net/2012/06/20/readforgradschool/>

Bates, M. J. (2015). The information professions: knowledge, memory,
heritage. *Information Research 20*(1), paper 655.

Buckland, M. K. (2017). Introduction. In *Information and Society*.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1-19.
[https://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu\_8275269](%20https://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu_8275269)
or <https://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu_8286111>

Buckland, M. K. (1997). What is a "document"? *Journal of the American
Society for Information Science* *48*(9): 804-809.
<http://people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~buckland/whatdoc.html>

Bush, V. (1945). As we may think. *Atlantic Monthly.*

<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1945/07/as-we-may-think/303881/>

*Optional*

Video: Memex animation <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c539cK58ees>

Video: The Man Who Wanted to Classify the World
<http://search.alexanderstreet.com/view/work/1641522>

Week 1, Lab: Introductions and Library Instruction with Dan Tracy
-----------------------------------------------------------------

*To Do:*

Sign up for site to visit for Assignment \#1 -- Collections Assessment

Week 2, Lecture: September 4: Collections -- Knox
-------------------------------------------------

*Required Readings*

Barbakoff, A. (2017). Balancing connections and collections. *Library
Journal.* September 15.
<http://lj.libraryjournal.com/2017/09/buildings/lbd/balancing-connections-collections-library-design/>

Björk, B.-C. (2017) Gold, green, and black open access. *Learned
Publishin*g *30*: 173-175. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Hunter, N. C., Legg, & Oehlerts, J. B. (1981). Two librarians, an
archivist, and 13,000 images: Collaborating to build a digital
collection. *Library Quarterly 80*(1), 81--103. \[e-journal\] \[Locate
full text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Junus, R. (2014). Digital collections and accessibility. *DSC Sandbox
blog.*
[https://blogpublic.lib.msu.edu/digital-scholarship-collaborative/2014/nov/digital-collections-and-accessibility/](http://blogpublic.lib.msu.edu/dsc-sandbox/2014/nov/digital-collections-and-accessibility/)

Lewis, D. W. (2013). From stacks to the web: The transformation of
academic library collecting. *College & Research Libraries 14*(2),
159--176. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Library of Congress. (2013). Update on the Twitter Archive at the
Library of Congress. Retrieved from
<http://blogs.loc.gov/loc/2013/01/update-on-the-twitter-archive-at-the-library-of-congress/>

Roberts, A. (2016). Chapter 10. Conceptualising the library collection
for the digital world. In: *Digital Information Strategies: From
Applications and Content to Libraries and People*. Waltham, MA: Chandos
Publishing, 143-156.
<https://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu_7980039>

*Optional Readings*

[Public libraries]{.underline}

Tomka, P. (2014). Unusual Collections: Oddities and Necessities.
*Illinois Library Association Reporter 32*(8), 4-7.
<https://www.ila.org/content/documents/Reporter_0814.pdf>

[Definitions]{.underline}

Lee, H-L. (2000). "What Is a Collection?" *Journal of the American
Society for Information Science 51*(12): 1106--13. \[e-journal\]
\[Locate full text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Week 2, Lab: Collection Policy Lab
----------------------------------

Assignment 1 Due Thursday September 6
-------------------------------------

Week 3, Lecture: September 12: Users and Information Needs -- Schneider
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

*Required Readings:*

Savolainen, R. (2016). Elaborating the conceptual space of
information-seeking phenomena. *Information Research 21*(3).
Retrieved from
http://www.informationr.net/ir/21-3/paper720.html\#.WZRkYJN96L4

Blair, A. (2003). Reading strategies for coping with information
overload ca. 1550-1700. *Journal of the History of Ideas 64*(1): 11-28.
\[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Bawden, D., & Robinson, L. (2009). The dark side of information:
Overload, anxiety and other paradoxes and pathologies. *Journal of
Information Science 35*(2): 180-191. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text
from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Johnson, J. D. (2014). Health-related information seeking: is it worth
it? *Information Processing & Management 50*(5): 708-717. \[e-journal\]
\[Locate full text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Connaway, L. S.; Faniel, I. M. (2014). *Reordering Ranganathan: Shifting
User Behaviors, Shifting Priorities.* Dublin, OH: OCLC Research, 1-5,
103-108.
<http://oclc.org/research/publications/library/2014/oclcresearch-reordering-ranganathan-2014-overview.html>

*Optional Readings:*

*Archival users*

Rhee, H. L. (2015). Reflections on archival user studies. *Reference and
User Services Quarterly 54*(4): 29-42. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text
from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

*Effects of age on information overload *

Benselin, J. C.; Ragsdell, G. (2016). Information overload: the
differences that age makes. *Journal of Librarianship and Information
Science 48*(3): 284-297. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

*Libraries & countering information overload*

Weiss, A. (2018). Chapter 7: The shock of information overload and big
data. In *Big Data Shocks: An Introduction to Big Data for Librarians
and Information Professionals.* Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 53-59.
<https://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu_8587766>

Week 3, Lab: Information Behavior Theories and Library Instruction with Chris Bailey
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To Do:

Read Text editor vs. Word Processor
<https://idrh.ku.edu/text-editors-and-word-processors>

and complete lab assignment about text editors and word processors.

For Final Assignment: Post your topic to the lab forum

Week 4, Lecture: September 18: Research Methods and Evaluations -- Knox
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

*Required Readings*:

Aufderheide, P. (2016, August 17). Does this have to go through the IRB?
*The Chronicle of Higher Education*. Retrieved from
<http://chronicle.com/article/Does-This-Have-to-Go/237476/>

Connaway, L. S., & Powell, R. R. (2010). Chapter 3. Selecting the
research method. In Basic *Research Methods for Librarians*, 5th ed (pp.
71-106). Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited. \[linked in Moodle
course space\]

Crotty, M. (1998). Introduction: The research process. In *The
foundations of social research: Meaning and Perspectives in the Research
Process*, (pp. 1-17). London: Sage Publications. \[linked in Moodle
course space\]

Research Study Examples:

Experimental: Shachaf, P., & Horowitz, S. (2007). Are virtual reference
services color blind? *Library & Information Science Research*, 28(4),
501-520. \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Indirect Observation: Buchanan, G. R., & McKay, D. (2017, March).
Something is lost, something is found: Book use at the library shelves.
In *Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Human Information Interaction
and Retrieval* (pp. 37-46). ACM.
<http://doi.org/10.1145/3020165.3020187>

Qualitative: Lee, C. P., & Trace, C. B. (2009). The role of information
in a community of hobbyist collectors. *Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology*, 60(3), 621-637. \[Locate full
text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Quantitative: Whitmire, E. (1999). Racial differences in the academic
library experiences of undergraduates. *The Journal of Academic
Librarianship*, 25(1), 33-37. \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

*Optional*:

Chu, H. (2015). Research methods in library and information science: A
content analysis. *Library & Information Science Research*, 37(1),
36-41. \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Fidel, R. (2008). Are we there yet?: Mixed methods research in library
and information science. *Library & Information Science Research*,
30(4), 265-272. \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

McDowell, K. (2009). Toward a history of children as readers,
1890--1930. *Book History*, 12(1), 240-265. \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Rhee, H. L. (2015). Reflections on archival user studies. *Reference and
User Services Quarterly* 54(4): 29-42. \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Sutton, B. (2017). Qualitative research methods in library and
information science \[ELIS classic\]. In M.J. Bates & M. Niles Maack
(Eds.), *Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences*, 4^th^ ed.
(pp. 3806-3819). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
<https://i-share.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/UIUdb.8212089>

Walliman, N. (2006). Defining the research problem. In *Social Research
Methods*, (pp 67-74). London: Sage Publications. \[linked in Moodle
course space\]

Week 4, Lab: Research Methods Exercise and Discussion of Assignment 2
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Assignment 2 Due Thursday September 20
--------------------------------------

To Do:

Complete Part 1 of Assignment \#2 BEFORE lab

Week 5, Lecture: September 25: Preservation -- [Jennifer Hain Teper](https://www.library.illinois.edu/bios/jhain/)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Required Readings:*

[Selection for preservation]{.underline}

Madrigal, A. C. (2017). Future historians probably won't understand our
Internet, and that's okay. *The Atlantic*. December 6.
<https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/12/it-might-be-impossible-for-future-historians-to-understand-our-internet/547463/>\
\
Sheffield, R. T. (2016). More than acid-free folders: extending the
concept of preservation to include the stewardship of unexplored
histories. *Library Trends* *64*(3): 572-584. \[e-journal\] \[Locate
full text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]\
\
Teper, J. H. (2014). Selection for preservation: a survey of current
practices in the field of preservation. *Library Resources & Technical
Services 58*(4): 220-232. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]\
\
[Digital preservation]{.underline}

Barone, F.; Zeitlyn, D.; Majer-Schönberger, V. (2015). Learning from
failure: The case of the disappearing website. *First Monday* 20(5).
<http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/5852/4456>\
\
Houghton, B. (2016). Preservation challenges in the digital age. *D-Lib
Magazine* 22(7/8).
<http://www.dlib.org/dlib/july16/houghton/07houghton.html>\
\
Conway, P. (2010). Preservation in the age of Google: Digitization,
digital preservation, and dilemmas. *The Library Quarterly* *80*(1),
61-79. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Week 5, Lab: Disaster Planning Lab and Command Line Mini-Lab
------------------------------------------------------------

To do:

Complete interfaces reading
<http://www.ictlounge.com/html/operating_systems.htm> and, if necessary,
complete Code Academy course on the command line
(<https://www.codecademy.com/learn/learn-the-command-line> ) before lab.
For further exploration, previous students have also recommended Basics
and Navigation of Conquering the Command Line
(<http://conqueringthecommandline.com/book/basics> ) and Learn Enough
Command Line to Be Dangerous
(<https://www.learnenough.com/command-line-tutorial> )

For Final Assignment: Post your revised topic to the lab forum

Week 6, Lecture: October 2: Metadata -- Bettivia 
-------------------------------------------------

*Required Readings:*

Swoger, B. (2012). What is metadata? A Christmas-themed exploration.
Info Culture.
<https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/information-culture/what-is-metadata-a-christmas-themed-exploration/>\
\
Pomerantz, J. (2015). Chapter 1. Introduction. In: Metadata. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1-18.
<http://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu_7937922>\
\
[Choosing a metadata scheme]{.underline}

Kennedy, M. R. (2008). Nine questions to guide you in choosing a
metadata schema. Journal of Digital Information 9(1).
<http://journals.tdl.org/jodi/article/view/226/205>

Smith-Yoshimura, K. (2017). How much metadata is practical?
Hangingtogether.org blog. November 14.
<http://hangingtogether.org/?p=6328>

[Metadata standards for different purposes]{.underline}

Elings, M. W.; Waibel, G. (2007). Metadata for all: Descriptive
standards and metadata sharing across libraries, archives, and museums.
First Monday 12(3).\
<http://www.uic.edu/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1628/1543>

Gartner, R. (2016). Chapter 3. Metadata becomes digital. In: *Metadata:
Shaping knowledge from antiquity to the semantic web*. Switzerland:
Springer, 27-39.
<https://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu_8128614>

Warren, J. W. (2015). Zen and the art of metadata maintenance. *Journal
of Electronic Publishing*. 18(3).
<http://quod.lib.umich.edu/j/jep/3336451.0018.305?view=text;rgn=main>\
\
*Optional Readings: *

[Map of metadata standards\
]{.underline}Riley, Jenn. (2009-2010). Seeing Standards: A Visualization
of the Metadata Universe. Retrieved from
<http://jennriley.com/metadatamap/>\
\
[Historical context\
]{.underline}Coyle, K. (2016). The evolving catalog: cataloging tech
from scrolls to computers. *American Libraries*. 47(1/2): 48-\
53.
<https://americanlibrariesmagazine.org/2016/01/04/cataloging-evolves/>\
\
Blei, D. (2017). How the index card cataloged the world. *The Atlantic*.
December 1.
<https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/12/how-the-index-card-catalogued-the-world/547271/>

Week 6, Lab: Cultural Heritage Lab. Wednesday class meets in classroom. Thursday classes meet at Spurlock Museum & return to classroom.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To do:

Read the instructions for the Cultural Heritage Object Description Lab.
In particular,

-   Look at the [example
    description](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/LIS501/syllabi/master/labs/chalice.md)

-   Look up the Getty Art & Architecture Thesaurus (AAT) and the Getty
    Thesaurus of Geographic Names
    (TGN) <http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/>

-   Read Spurlock Museum [Visitor Conduct
    Policy](https://www.spurlock.illinois.edu/about/policies/visitor-conduct.html) and [Visitor
    Photography
    Policy](https://www.spurlock.illinois.edu/about/policies/visitor-photography.html) 

Week 7, Lecture: October 9: Interfaces, Searches, and Discovery -- [Bill Mischo](https://www.library.illinois.edu/bios/w-mischo/)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Required readings and video:*

\[Video\] Christen, K. (2017, July 13). We have never been neutral:
Search, discovery, and the politics of access. OCLC Distinguished
Seminar Series. Retrieved

via <http://www.oclc.org/research/events/2017/07-13.html>

[Searching and search systems]{.underline}

Burke, J. J.; Tumbleson, B. E. (2016). Search systems and finding tools.
*Library Technology Reports 52*(2): 17-22. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full
text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

LaFrance, A. (2016). Searching for lost knowledge in the age of
intelligent machines. *The Atlantic.* December 1.
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2016/12/the-search-for-lost-knowledge/506879/>

[Browsing and serendipitous discovery]{.underline}

Bawden, D. (2011). Encountering on the road to Serendip? Browsing in new
information environments. In Innovations in information retrieval:
Perspectives for theory and practice (pp. 1-21). London: Facet. \[linked
in Moodle course space\]

Bell, S. J. (2014). Collections are for collisions: design it into the
experience. *American Libraries* *45*(9/10): 46-49.
\[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Maloney, A.; Conrad, L. Y. (2016). *Expecting the unexpected:
Serendipity, discovery, and the scholarly research process.* Thousand
Oaks, CA: SAGE Publishing.
<http://us.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/serrdiscovery.pdf>

[Recommending]{.underline}

Behnert, C.; Lewandowski, D. (2015). Ranking search results in library
information systems---Considering ranking approaches adapted from web
search engines. *The Journal of Academic Librarianship 41*(6): 725-735.
\[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

[Online catalogs]{.underline}

Owen, W.; Michalak, S. C. (2015). Engine of innovation: Building the
high performance catalog. *Information Technology and Libraries* 34(2):
5-18. <http://ejournals.bc.edu/ojs/index.php/ital/article/view/5702/pdf>

Petrucciani, A. (2015). Quality of library catalogs and value of (good)
catalogs. *Cataloging & Classification Quarterly* *53*(3-4): 303-313,
2015. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
[https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az&sa=D&ust=1533666903440000&usg=AFQjCNFZ2pb7-eNMd_WoCNahRqkscUy7EQ)\]

[Young users]{.underline}

Gossen, T.; Nünberger, A. (2013). Specifics of information retrieval for
young users: a survey. *Information Processing & Management* *49*:
739-756. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

[Mobile access]{.underline}

McCrillis, A.; Piazza, A.; Larson, C. (2017). Seeing the big picture
through smaller screens: Characterizing the library users' experience on
mobile devices. *Journal of Electronic Resources in Medical Libraries*
*14*(3-4): 114-119. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
[https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az&sa=D&ust=1533666903440000&usg=AFQjCNFZ2pb7-eNMd_WoCNahRqkscUy7EQ)\]

Week 7, Lab: Pandoc
-------------------

To Do:

Read instructions for Pandoc Lab and try to install Pandoc from
<http://pandoc.org>\
For Final Assignment -- Submit 1-3 paragraphs of research journal.

Week 8, Lecture: October 16: Subject Analysis and Languages -- Schneider
------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Required Readings:*

[Subject analysis]{.underline}*\
*Joudrey, D. N.; Taylor, A. G. (2018). *The Organization of
Information.* 4th ed. Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited. Appendix
A. An approach to subject analysis (pp. 579-584). \[linked in Moodle
course space\]

Fidel, R. (1994). User-centered indexing. *Journal of the American
Society for Information Science 45*(8): 572-576. \[e-journal\] \[Locate
full text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Klenczon,W.; Rygiel, P. (2014). Librarian cornered by images, or how to
index visual resources. *Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 52*(1):
42-61. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Gross, T.; Taylor, A. G.; Joudrey, D. N. (2015). Still a lot to lose:
The role of controlled vocabulary in keyword searching. *Cataloging &
Classification Quarterly 53*(1): 1-39. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text
from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

***(read any two of the following):** Limitations of subject languages *

Buckland, M. K. (2012). Obsolescence in subject description. *Journal of
Documentation 68*(2): 154-161**.** \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Bates, J.; Rowley, J. (2011). Social reproduction and exclusion in
subject indexing: A comparison of public library OPACs and LibraryThing
folksonomy. *Journal of Documentation 67*(3): 431-448. \[e-journal\]
\[Locate full text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Adler, M.; Huber, J. T.; Nix, A. T. (2017). Stigmatizing disability:
Library classifications and the marking and marginalization of books
about people with disabilities. *Library Quarterly 87*(2): 117-135.
\[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Higgins, M. (2016). Totally invisible: Asian American representation in
the *Dewey Decimal Classification,* 1876-1996. *Knowledge Organization
43*(8): 609-621. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Nesset, V. (2016). A look at classification and indexing practices for
elementary school children: who are we really serving? *The Indexer
34*(2): 63-65. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

*Optional readings:*

[Subject headings]{.underline}

Ferris, A. M. (2018). Birth of a subject heading. *Library Resources and
Technical Services* 62(1): 16-27.
<https://journals.ala.org/index.php/lrts/article/view/6555>

[Taxonomies*\
*]{.underline}Hedden, H. (2016). Chapter 1. What are taxonomies? *The
Accidental Taxonomist.* 2nd ed. Medford, NJ: Information Today, 16-32.
<https://vufind.carli.illinois.edu/vf-uiu/Record/uiu_8104155>

[Tagging\
]{.underline}Rafferty, P. M. (2017). Tagging. *Encyclopedia of Knowledge
Organization.* <http://www.isko.org/cyclo/tagging>

[New uses for metadata\
]{.underline}Bauder, J.; Lange, E. (2015). Exploratory subject searching
in library catalogs: reclaiming the vision. *Information Technology and
Libraries 34*(2): 92-102.
<http://ejournals.bc.edu/ojs/index.php/ital/article/view/5888/pdf>

[OCR\
]{.underline}Kean, S. (2018). Artificial intelligence is cracking open
the Vatican's secret archives. *The Atlantic.* April 30.
<https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2018/04/vatican-secret-archives-artificial-intelligence/559205/>

Kichuk, D. (2015). Loose, falling characters and sentences: The
persistence of the OCR problem in digital repository e-books. *Portal:
Libraries and the Academy 15*(1): 59-91. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full
text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

[Quality]{.underline}

Beall, J. (2005). Metadata and data quality problems in the digital
library. *Journal of Digital Information,*6(3).
<http://journals.tdl.org/jodi/article/viewArticle/65>

Week 8, Lab: Indexing Lab and Library Instruction with Chris Bailey
-------------------------------------------------------------------

To Do:

Read Leckie paper (find this on your section Moodle) and fill out
template before lab

For Final Assignment -- Sample annotation due

For Final Assignment -- Presentation signup due

Week 9, Lecture: October 23: Structures and Standards -- Bettivia
-----------------------------------------------------------------

*Required Readings and videos:*

[Introducing terminology]{.underline}\
Banerjee, K. (2017). Translating technobabble: All you really need to
know about URIs, linked data, and FRBR. *Computers in Libraries*
*37*(10): 21-24. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]\
\
\[Video\] Ray, K. (2010). Web 3.0: a documentary.
<https://vimeo.com/11529540>\
\
[FRBR]{.underline}\
\[Video\] Bram Stoker's Dracula in FRBR Terms.\
(2009). <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LN0vKCFsXPE>\
\
Tillett, B. (2003). What is FRBR? A conceptual model for the
bibliographic universe. <http://www.loc.gov/cds/downloads/FRBR.PDF>\
\
[Linked data\
]{.underline}Fons, T. (2016). Making libraries visible on the web.
*Library Journal* *141*(13): 44-46.
<https://www.libraryjournal.com/?detailStory=making-libraries-visible-on-the-web-the-digital-shift>\
\
Szeto, K. (2017). The mystery of the Schubert song: the linked data
promise. *Notes* *74*(1), 9-23. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

UCLA Continuing Resources Study Group. (n.d.). Semantic Web and Linked
Data Research Guide. <http://guides.library.ucla.edu/c.php?g=357266>\
\
*Optional:*\
[Linked data]{.underline}\
Eric Lease Morgan and LiAM. (2014). Linked Archival Metadata: A
Guidebook. version .99 pages 6-24
<http://infomotions.com/sandbox/liam/tmp/guidebook.pdf>\
\
[MARC & bibliographic records\
]{.underline}Library of Congress. (2004). Understanding MARC
Bibliographic. (Part I- VI). <http://www.loc.gov/marc/umb>\
\
Clarke, R. I. (2015). Breaking records: the history of bibliographic
records and their influence in conceptualizing bibliographic data.
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly *53*(3-4): 286-302. \[e-journal\]
\[Locate full text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

*Standards making*\
Example: Unicode as a standard\
Bettels, J., & Bishop, F. A. (1993). Unicode: A Universal Character
Code. *Digital Technical Journal* *5*(3), 21--31. \[e-journal\] \[Locate
full text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]\
\
Example: markdown as a standard\
Leonard, S. (2016, March). Guidance on markdown: Design philosophies,
stability strategies, and select registrations (No. RFC 7764). RFC
Editor. Retrieved\
from <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7764>\
\
Leonard, S. (2016, March). The text/markdown media type (No. RFC 7763).
RFC Editor. Retrieved from <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7763>\
\
[Historical context\
]{.underline}Blei, D. (2017). How the index card cataloged the world.
The Atlantic. December 1.
<https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2017/12/how-the-index-card-catalogued-the-world/547271/>\
\
[Semantic Web]{.underline}\
Wong, E. Y. (2016). UCLA CRSG semantic web resources. *Technical
Services Quarterly* *33*(3): 340-341. \[e-journal\] \[Locate full text
from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Week 9, Lab: Presentations and FRBR & RDA
-----------------------------------------

For Final Assignment -- Presentations
-------------------------------------

Week 10, Lecture: October 30: Wrap Up 
--------------------------------------

*Required Readings:*

Dyson, F. (2011). How we know. *The New York Review of Books*. Retrieved
from
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2011/mar/10/how-we-know/?pagination=false>.

Ferraris, M. (2013). Documentality-Or why nothing social exists beyond
the text. *From ontos verlag: Publications of the Austrian Ludwig
Wittgenstein Society-New Series (Volumes 1-18)*, *3*. Retrieved from\
<http://wittgensteinrepository.org/agora-ontos/article/viewFile/2015/2214>

Kichuk, D. (2015). Loose, falling characters and sentences: The
persistence of the OCR problem in digital repository e-books. *Portal:
Libraries and the Academy 15*(1): 59-91.

\[e-journal\] \[Locate full text from
<https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Loesch, M. F. (2011). VIAF (Virtual International Authority File).
*Technical Services Quarterly 28*(2): 255-256. \[e-journal\] \[Locate
full text from <https://sfx.carli.illinois.edu/sfxuiu/az>\]

Secker, J., Morrison, C., Stewart, N., & Horton, L. (2016, September
16). To boldly go...the librarian's role in text and data mining. *CILIP
blog*. Retrieved from
<https://archive.cilip.org.uk/blog/boldly-go-librarians-role-text-data-mining>

Walker, L. A., & Armstrong, M. (2014). "I cannot tell what the dickens
his name is": Name disambiguation in institutional repositories.
*Journal of Librarianship and Scholarly Communication 2*(2). Retrieved
from <https://jlsc-pub.org/articles/abstract/10.7710/2162-3309.1095/>

Week 10, Lab: Presentations
---------------------------

For Final Assignment: Presentations
-----------------------------------

Week 11, Lecture: November 6: No Class Meeting
----------------------------------------------

Week 11, Lab: Final Assignment Due Thursday November 8
------------------------------------------------------
